# cogli2

cogli2 is a simple tool for the visualisation of configurations of coarse-grained systems. It has its own format for input files (*.mgl), as well as [oxDNA](http://dna.physics.ox.ac.uk/) configurations. It can be extended to support additional custom input. Figures can be generated either by directly generating a png file or by exporting a povray file that can be then raytraced. 

## Table of Contents

* [Building the executable](#building-the-executable)
	* [Requirements](#requirements)
	* [Compilation](#compilation)
	* [CMake options](#cmake-options)
* [Usage](#usage)
* [File formats](#file-formats)
	* [The `mgl` format](#the-mgl-format)
	* [The visibility file](#the-visibility-file)
	* [Setting custom colors](#setting-custom-colors)
* [Actions](#actions)

## Building the executable

### Requirements

* `xorg-dev`
* `libgl1-mesa-dev`
* `cmake` >= 3.1
* `make`
* A c++11-compliant compiler (tested with `g++` >= 5.4)
* Optionally, some information is drawn on the screen if the [FreeType library](https://www.freetype.org/) is installed (`libfreetype6-dev`)

### Compilation

Extract the cogli2 archive (or download the nightly build via svn) and compile it with the following commands:

	cd cogli2 	    # enter the cogli2 folder
	mkdir build 	# create a new build folder. It is good practice to compile out-of-source
	cd build
	cmake ..		# here you can specify additional options, see next section
	make -j4		# compile the code. The -jX make option makes it compile the code in parallel by using X threads.

At the end of the compilation the final executable (cogli2) will be placed in the build/bin folder.

### CMake options

Here is a list of options that can be passed to cmake during the pre-compilation stage:

* `-DDebug=ON`				Compiles with debug symbols and without optimisation flags
* `-DG=ON`					Compiles with debug symbols + optimisation flags
* `-DLR_TETRA=ON`			Enable a particular color scheme for DNA configurations.
* `-DNOPNG=ON`				Forces cmake to not compile against libpng even if it is found. It is sometimes necessary on Mac OS X systems.

## Usage

	Options:
	  --help, -h
	          Print usage and exit
	  --dim widthxheight
	          Set the initial window dimensions (defaults to 1024x768)
	  --bring-in-box, -b
	          Bring particles back into the box
	  --debug, -d
	          Debug mode. All primitives are rendered as wireframes
	  --topology, -t topology_file
	          Topology file required to open oxDNA configurations
	  --visibility, -i visibility_file
	          Visibility file containing a list of particles that should not appear
	in the box
	  --load, -l file
	          Load a cogli2 state file
	  --shift-every, -s value
	          Group particles so that periodic boundary conditions are applied only
	to the centres of mass of the group
	  --ribbons
	          Export DNA strands as ribbons in povray format
	  --kern-frenkel, -k
	          Export patches on patchy particles as truncated cones in povray format
	  --only-pov, -o
	          Generate povray output and exit
	  --com-centre, -v
	          Centre the first configuration's centre of mass
	  --always-centre
	          Configurations are centred each time they are visualised with respect
	to their centre of mass (if no arguments are given) or to a specific
	particle/strand (if given)
	  --inertia, -I
	          When centred, configurations are rotated so that their principal axes
	of inertia are aligned along x, y and z
	  --mm-grooving, -m
	          Set major/minor grooving for DNA configurations
	  --rna
	          Assume RNA strands
	  --starr[=2]
	          Assume Starr configurations. The optional parameter changes the size
	of the dimer cores when visualizing vitrimer configurations
	  --manfredo
	          Used for displaying coarse-grained tetramer configurations. Requires a
	topology file
	  --ico
	               Used for displaying icosahedra. Requires a topology file
	  --nathan, -n size_ratio
	          Used for displaying Nathan-related configurations. Requires a topology
	file. Expects a numerical value indicating the colloid-to-polymer size ratio
	  --patchy, -p delta,cosmax,N_A[,N_B]
	          Assumes a patchy configuration, as generated by oxDNA. Requires a
	topology file. Expects a comma-separated list of parameters (radial and angular
	widths, number of patches on species A and, optionally, of species B)
	  --outlines, -u
	          Draw outlines around objects. It does not work for every object
	  --resolution, -r initial_resolution
	          Set the initial resolution of the objects. The default is 15
	  --confs-to-skip, -c skip_n_confs
	          Number of configurations that should be skipped every time the user
	chooses to change the current configuration by using '+' or '-'
	  --colors-from=<file>
	          Files to load the colors from
	  --groups-from=<file>
	          Files to load the groups from
	  --rbc
	          Assume an RBC file
	  --box=Lx,Ly,Lz
	          Set the lengths of the box sides, overriding the values found in the
	input files
	  --levy
	          Assume Levy configurations (requires a topology file)
	  --tep
	          Assume TEP configurations (requires a topology file)
	  --tep_t
	          Threshold for the colouring of TEP beads (defaults to 0.98)
	  --opacity
	          If given, the particles indicated in the visibility file will not be
	hidden but assigned the value of opacity provided
	  --bcab
	          Give DNA bases the same color as their respective backbones (bcab ==
	Base Color As Backbone)
	  --drums
	          Color-code DNA bases depending on chemical identity, according to the
	DRuMS color scheme: adenine is blue, guanine is green, cytosine is red, thymine
	is yellow, uracil is orange.
	  --actions-from, -a action_file
	          A file containing the list of actions that will be performed on the
	single configurations. Each action will effectively become a new configuration.
	'+' and '-' can be used to navigate back and forth actions
	  --ashell, -A
	          Assume ashell configurations (requires a topology file)
	  --povray-shadows, -A
	          Let povray-generated objects cast shadows
	  --version, -v
          	  Print the version and exit
	
	Keyboard and Mouse Bindings:
	  +                    show the next configuration
	  -                    show the previous configuration
	  F1, ..., F8          toggle light number 1, ..., 8
	  P                    print povray output. Redirect to the file given by the --output option or to an automatically generated name
	  ctrl+p               export the current view in PNG format
	  a(A)                 increase (decrease) ambient light
	  b                    hide/show the box
	  c                    load the initial (or stored) camera state
	  C                    save the current camera state
	  d(D)                 increase (decrease) diffusive light
	  f(F)                 increase (decrease) the field of view
	  h                    hide selected particles
	  i                    show/hide printing of the fps counter and other useful debug information
	  k                    show/hide the axes (3 arrows: red -> x axis, green -> y axis, blue -> z axis)
      l                    show/hide labels (only available in the perspective projection mode)
	  number               select particles in the number-th control group
	  p                    change the projection from perspective to orthographic (and viceversa)
	  page down            decrease the level of detail of the objects
	  page up              increase the level of detail of the objects
	  s                    show all the particles  x(X), y(Y), z(Z)     move all the particles in the x, y, or z positive (negative) direction
	  ctrl+x(X), ctrl+y(Y) rotate the scene counterclockwise (clockwise) with respect to the vertical or horizontal axis
	  u                    dump the cogli2 state to a .cpy file that can be loaded back in cogli2 by using the --load command option
	  q(Q)                 zoom in (out) (pressing Ctrl at the same time increases zoom speed by a factor 5)
	  v                    centre the configuration's centre of mass
	  ctrl+w               select all particles
	  ctrl+shift+w         invert selection
	  ctrl+number          save selected particles in the number-th control group
	  ctrl+click           select the particle below the cursor
	  shift+click          print the id of the particle below the cursor
  
## File formats

### The `mgl` format

For historical reasons cogli2 files have a '.mgl' extension. The format of mgl files is very simple. The first line can be optionally used to specify the box dimensions:

	.Box:Lx,Ly,Lz  

where `Lx`, `Ly`, and `Lz` are the lengths of the sides of the simulation box. If the box is cubic cogli2 also supports the syntax

	.Vol:TOT_VOLUME

where `TOT_VOLUME` is the volume of the cubic simulation box, and hence interpreted as `Lx*Ly*Lz`. If no header line is found, the dimensions of the bounding box of the configuration are used. Note that if the bounding box is too small (more specifically, is the length of its diagonal is smaller than unity), a default box of (5, 5, 5) is used instead.  

After the header, each line is interpreted as an object. Currently, cogli2's mgl parser supports

* spheres
* cylinders
* dipolar spheres (i.e. spheres with an embedded dipole moment represented as an arrow)
* patchy particles
* icosahedra 

The base syntax (used for spheres), is the following:

	x y z @ r C[color]

where x, y and z give the position of the particle's centre of mass, r is the radius and color can be specified as a default color (red, blue, green, yellow, black, white, grey, cyan, magenta, orange, violet, brown or pink) or with exadecimal (e.g. #aaaaaa) or rgba (e.g. 0,1,0,1, the last digit controls the opacity) notations. 

The syntax for cylinders is the following:

	x y z @ r C[color] C ax ay az

where ax, ay and az specify the axis. The length of the axis is given by sqrt(ax^2 + ay^2 + az^2).

Dipolar spheres have the following syntax:

	x y z @ r C[color] D dx dy dz C[arrow_color]

where dx, dy and dz is the dipole moment. arrow_color can be specified in exactly the same way as the particle color. Note that the particle color should be at least partially transparent. If not explicitly specified, the opacity of the particle will be automatically set at 0.5.

Patchy particles are rendered as spheres with Kern-Frenkel like patches. The syntax is

	x y z @ r C[color] M p1x p1y p1z p1w C[p1color] p2x p2y p2z p2w C[p2color] ...

where p1x, p1y and p1z specify the orientation and length of the first patch, p1w is the half width of the patch expressed in radians and p1color is its color. Note that you can add as many patches as you want.

Finally, icosahedra can be drawn with:

	x y z @ r C[color] I x1 x2 x3 z1 z2 z3
	
where `x1 x2 x3` and `z1 z2 z3` identifies the `x` and `z` axes of the icosahedron.
	
where 

A complete with one of each kind of supported particles would be:

	.Box:8,8,8
	1 3 5 @ 0.8 C[red]
	7 3 5 @ 0.5 C[green] C 2 2 2
	5 7 5 @ 0.3 C[0,0,1,0.5] D 1 0 0 C[black]
	3 5 5 @ 0.5 C[magenta] M 0 0 0.6 0.8 C[0,0,0.5] 0.3 0.5 0 0.55 C[1,0.5,0.3]
	
### The visibility file

The visibility file, specified with the `--visibility` command line option, controls the appearance of the shapes rendered by `cogli2`. By default all shapes are visible. This behaviour can be altered by setting `default:hide` in the first line of the visibility line. All other lines will specify the visibility status of the shapes. Each line should contain a comma-separated list. Each element of the list should either be an integer or two integers separated by a dash, which specifies an interval of integers (with both endpoints included). Optionally, each line can be prepended with either `hide:` or `show:`. Lines are processed one after the other, meaning that settings from previous lines can be overwritten by subsequence lines. Here is an example of a visibility file that hides all shapes but those with indexes from 1 to 100, with shapes 5 and 8 excluded:

	default:hide
	show:1-100
	hide:5,8
	
### Setting custom colors

**Nota Bene:** this method is compatible with DNA and RNA configurations only. 

Custom colors for nucleotides can be set by passing a file to the `--colors-from` switch. Each line of the color file should contain two columns: a comma-separated list of integers and a color. The syntax for the comma-separated list is the one explained [above](#the-visibility-file) for the visibility file. A color can be specified in three ways: either with a string (supported colors: red, green, blue, yellow, cyan, magenta, orange, violet, brown, pink, black, white, grey) or with the RGB format as a comma-separated list of values. Both 0-1 or 0-255 ranges are supported. Here is an example of a color file that will color red the first 10 nucleotides and blue nucleotides with indexes ranging from 40 to 50:

	0-9 red
	40-50 0,0,1
	
## Actions

The `--actions-from, -a` option requires a file that specifies operations to be performed on each configuration passed as input. These operations (called *actions*) add frames (which behave similarly to additional configurations) to the cogli2 scenes. These actions make it easier to create movies out of configurations. They are best used in conjunction with the `-o` option, which makes cogli2 print out a povray file for each scene, and hence action, without firing up the graphic interface.

An action file is composed by lines, each of which specifies a change to a scene. For example, a line might tell cogli2 to use 10 frames perform a rotation the configuration for 30 degrees around the y axis.

### Rotations

Rotations of the camera can be performed with the following syntax:

	r x y z tot_angle n_frames
	
Where `x y z` specify the rotation axis, `tot_angle` is the *total* angle one wishes to rotate the configuration for, and `n_frames` is the number of frames that will be used to perform the whole rotation. The rotation is performed by keeping fixed the point the camera is looking at.

### Translations

Translations of the camera can be performed with the following syntax:

	t x y z tot_extent n_frames
	
Similarly to rotations, translations are performed along a direction, specified by `x y z`, and for an overall displacement given by `tot_extent`. `n_frames` sets the number of frames that will be employed.

### Spins

The camera can be made spin on itself by using the same syntax of [rotations](#rotations). Only the initial letter, which specifies the action type, changes from `r` to `s`, *viz*:

	s x y z tot_angle n_frames

### Actions example

	# first we translate for 5 frames
	t 0 0 -1 2 5
	# and then we rotate for 10 more frames
	r 0 1 0 180 10

The first line tells cogli2 to use 5 frames to translate the camera towards the screen, while the second one produces a rotation along y of 180° using 10 frames. Copy the two lines in the `actions.dat` file and pass it to cogli2 (`cogli2 -a actions.dat myconf.mgl`) to see it in action.

## Known issues

* In order to handle transparencies, shapes are drawn from back to front *on a shape-type basis*. In other words, transparent spheres will be always rendered correctly, whereas a transparent cylinder and a transparent sphere will not always be rendered in the correct order, so that one of the two may not be let light pass through when rendered from some specific direction. In general, spheres are rendered last, since these are the most common shapes.

## Dependencies & Acknowledgements

cogli2 depends on a minimum number of external libraries. In particular, to compile it you will need the opengl libraries, cmake, make and a c++ compiler. On Debian-based systems, these can be installed by installing the `xorg-dev`, `libgl1-mesa-dev`, `cmake`, `make` and `g++` packages. Optionally, if cmake finds `libpng` it will enable cogli2 to export directly in png format. 

Internally, cogli2 uses the following libraries/utilities, which are included in the source tree:

* [glfw](http://www.glfw.org/)
* [glad](https://github.com/Dav1dde/glad)
* [glm](http://glm.g-truc.net/0.9.6/index.html)
* [BSpline](http://www.eol.ucar.edu/homes/granger/)
* [CMakeRC](https://github.com/vector-of-bool/cmrc)
* [glText](https://github.com/vallentin/glText)

As far as I know, this is compatible with their licenses. If you are a developer or a mantainer of one of these projects and you think that cogli2 does not comply with your license, please contact us.

The development of this software has been partially supported by the European Commission through the Marie Skłodowska−Curie Fellowship No. 702298-DELTAS.
